Model Overview: 

The file consists of 3 machine learning models that were developed and tested for weather score prediction: HistGradient, Neural Networks, and LightGBM. The model that provided the most accurate results with the least uncertainty was LightGBM. LightGBM is a gradient boosting algorithm over decision trees, which is efficient compared to other models. Since the data was biased and consisted of several null values, instead of developing a regression model, we developed a quantile regression model. The model uses gradient-boosted decision trees to predict the 90th percentile of weather-related delays. So, the model learns patterns by building many small trees, where each new tree corrects the errors from the previous trees. When we began developing our models, we focused on reducing the squared error; however, the lack of detailed and balanced datasets made it infeasible. Further, the squared error is not the best approach in this project, as the average delay of flights was around 5-10 minutes, making flights with higher delays outliers. Instead, we focused on quantile loss as this approach is better at predicting worst-case scenarios, which is important considering the impact of weather features. 

The model utilizes a combination of weather features (temperature, humidity, precipitation, snow, wind, pressure) and time features (hour of day, day of week, month) to understand how these conditions influence delay risk. In short, the model predicts the 90th percentile of delay minutes. Afterward, we sampled 2 million rows to compute SHAP values for the trained LightGBM model to measure how strongly each feature influenced the high weather-related delays. Then, the SHAP values are averaged and normalized to form the importance weight that reflects the significance of each feature. Lastly, each airport's normalized features are multiplied by the importance weights, resulting in a 0-100 score. 
